Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops. And today
I'm joined by Doctor Paul Molde. He is an
Associate Professor of Cognitive and Information Sciences and Faculty
in the Quantitative and Systems Biology graduate program at
the University of California Merced. And he's also an
external professor at the Santa Fe Institute. And today
we're talking about his book Modeling, Social Behavior, Mathematical
and Agent Based Models of Social Dynamics and Cultural
Evolution. So Doctor Malden, welcome to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Oh, very nice to be here. Thanks.
So, just to introduce the topic here. What is
modeling in science exactly? I mean, what is the
model?
Yeah. So uh most science, most of it depends
no matter what field you're using, whether it's biology
or the social sciences or chemistry or physics. Very
often use models. Uh And you're using a model
really, anytime you're studying something kind of indirectly, um
if we want to know about a rock and
I wanna know about this, I have a rock
in my hand and I wanna study this specific
rock. I don't need a model because I'm studying
the rock. Um If I wanna study rocks in
general or if I wanna study people in general,
I, I need a model. A model is something
that I study that represents, I usually a broader
class of systems or similar systems or phenomena. So
in, in, we use model organisms and most people
who study fruit flies or rats, some of them
are, but most of them are not interested directly
in. I really want to know about fruit flies
per se or rats per se. They're using those
organisms as models for, let's say any organism with
genes or all mammals or even, you know, representing
social organisms, uh et cetera. Um And experiments are
often models, let's say in, in psychology, if you're
studying, you know, if you have a kid and
you sit them down at a table and you
put a marshmallow in front of them, this is
like a famous psychology study. They, they torch for
these kids by giving, putting a marshmallow in front
of them and then saying, all right, I'm gonna
leave the room. But, and if that marshmallow is
still there, when I come back, I'll give you
a second marshmallow and they'll test how long kids
can wait and they'll try to correlate this with
other things. And aside from maybe some very strange
people, most people who do this kind of thing
are not interested per se in whether in how
long kids can wait to eat a marshmallow, right?
They're interested in a broader class of phenomena like
willpower or trust and authority or et cetera. Um
And so, uh a type of model that's very
common in, in some sciences and slightly less common
in other sciences are formal models. And a formal
model is usually a mathematical or computational representation of
some sort of decomposition of a system where you
say OK, here are the relationships I think are
there and these are the properties I think matter.
And we can then use the formalism to examine
the logically necessary consequences of our assumptions. And this
allows us to test all sorts of things and,
and really get a handle on how to describe
theories and how to classify certain phenomena, how to
find edge cases and, and when certain ideas or
phenomena are likely to happen or unlikely to happen.
So, I mean, of course, you, your book is
focused on social phenomena. But just before we get
into depth, when it comes to science more generally,
I know that that this is a very broad
question, but how do people know what they should
include in the model? What they should exclude if
they're studying a multifactorial food phenomenon? Which we're all,
we're, I mean, almost always studying in social science,
the factors that they should live in or the
factors that they should consider the ones they should
live out. I mean, how does this process go?
Yeah, it's a really good question. Uh And it's
a, it's a really important one, not just for
building models, but just for, in generally, in general
developing any sort of theory or hypothesis uh for,
for what to test. Because ultimately any hypothesis is
not about the whole world. It's about uh a
deconstruction where we think certain parts of a system
or a phenomenon are really important and it's about
the relationships between those important things. And so any
model is ultimately in service of a particular kind
of question or idea. Um And I think this
is something that's often missed. You can't just have
a model of a system and say, oh, this
is a model of a system, whether that model
is a system, the system is like a city
or a relationship or a group or an ecology
or a species, uh you know, or, or, or,
you know, a food web, you need to have
a specific question or theory about some, some specific
type of phenomenon or relationship. And you need to
say these are the things in the world in
this system that I think are important to my
idea. I need to represent the people because my
theory is about the people I need to represent
uh their co-operative behavior because my theory is about
their co-operative behavior. Do I need to represent their
age or their sex or their wealth or their
geographical location? Maybe if that's what my hypothesis is
about or theory is about or I think that
differences in those factors are gonna be really important
and I have some idea about that. But if
not, I, I'm probably gonna exclude them because I
can't in include everything. A model is the, the,
the value of a model is often about abstracting
away all of the messiness of the real world
and saying, OK, if we could ignore all those
other sources of noise and interference and other factors,
all things being equal. If this relationship and these
properties that I'm including in the model were all
there were what would happen. And uh this so,
so this problem of this is sometimes called decomposition
or sometimes called articulation of parts about figuring out
what are the parts of the system that are
in the model? And what are the properties of
those parts that are important for the model is,
is really at the core of model development. Um
And for any given system, you can have many,
many models that might apply because they apply to
different kinds of questions and a correlator to that,
is that different kinds of models or different kinds
of decompositions allow you to ask different kinds of
questions about a system.
Yeah. And you mentioned the importance of theory there.
Uh Since we're talking here about social science or
we're going to talk about some social phenomena here.
As I've already mentioned the fact that apparently in
the social science there's no broadly agreed theoretical foundation,
is that a problem here or
not? I think it's a problem. Uh II I
think the caveat to that is we should be
careful about rushing into committing to any specific theory
because of how hard the social sciences are. Um
YOU know, uh there's a reason why some of
the, the, the earliest formal sciences were things like
the physics of, you know, moving bodies and, and
astronomy where the number of moving parts is is
very few. And the number of uh interferences can
be small. And also the the different ways to
conceptualize a system are fairly limited. Like if you
have rock falling and you're just trying to say
like, OK, uh falling on a on the surface
of an earth of a planet, you have a
big thing and a little thing that are attracted
to each other with gravity done. And you have
a theory about how forces work and gravitation work.
Now that's not trivial. Those are hard things to
do and it's a, it's a real achievement. But
you think about social science and you think about
how complicated an individual is and you can describe
them at the, you know, molecular level, the physiological
level, the cognitive level, the developmental level, they have
goals and beliefs and motivations and social relationships and
entanglements, they get cold, they get hungry and then
you put them in a network of other people
and then you realize that, you know, they're bound
by norms and culture and physical infrastructure and ecology
and expectations and risk management. And it's just crazy
complicated just in terms of the number of ways
you can describe anything. Um But a problem when
we don't have any formal theory, we have lots
of theories. So theory, this is a well worn
thing like uh I, I feel like I don't
even, I almost don't need to repeat this because
it's been said so many times. Or maybe I
do that, you know, theory, the word theory in
the sciences means something different than the colloquial meaning
of the word theory. It's not just sort of
any idea, but it's, it's usually a set of
constraints on hypothesis generation that is well justified. So
why do I make a theory? Well, I have
a theory and I can therefore many hypotheses or
predictions follow from that theory because what it is
is the set of assumptions that will constrain all
hypotheses that I generate about some system. And when
we don't have a clear theory, so there's many,
many, there everyone's, there's a joke among social psychologists
which is that in that field, theories are like
toothbrushes, right? Everyone's got to have one but you
don't want to use anyone else's. Um This is
a AAA large problem for several reasons. One it
makes collaboration and coordinating between uh researchers really hard.
It means um that theories stated this way are
really hard to falsify. If they're just stated in
words, words are ambiguous, they're vague. You can say,
well, that's not what I mean. If somebody says,
oh, it seems like this result doesn't fit your
theory and you can say, well, that's not what
I meant. Um And it means that the theories
are kind of either they're an up or down
situation, right? If I just say a theory in
words and say, I think that the reason that
uh people have social identities is because they want
a feeling of belongingness, but also they need to
stand out and these things oppose each other. Um
There's a OK, a the there's a million ways
to formalize that to say, you know, what does
or doesn't count as fitting that theory. And two,
I think I just said A and two, but
it's fine. Um The second point is that it
makes it really hard to build on the theory
to extend it to say, well, OK, what about
uh maybe that there are versions of this theory
that hold only in certain conditions and not others.
This goes along with, let's say another theory about
social organization or network structure or cooper operation. And
how do these different factors fit together and when
they're verbal and they just sort of written out
and talked about as the way that sort of
classical social science theory often does. It makes them
hard to not only falsify but also extend and
build upon and so formalizing things by saying, all
right, we gotta write down some math, write down
some computational algorithms to say here's what we're talking
about when I'm talking about co-operation or norms or
contagion or you know, identity, whatever it is, I'm
gonna talk about it like this, exactly this relationship.
And therefore, I can say I can a, I
can derive exact conditions when some phenomenon will or
won't happen. And also if you object, you can
say exactly whether or not the real world has
uh conditions that meet my assumptions or don't because
I've specified my assumptions really precisely.
So in the book, you focus on two different
kinds of models, mathematical models and agent based models.
But could you tell us the difference there?
Sure. Um I mean, the difference is, is not
so stark as some people like to think. So
mathematical models is a model that you can write
down with mathematical equations. So if I have a
model of um you know, uh predator prey dynamics,
and I can write down an equation for the,
the ch the rate of change in the population
of the prey species as a function of its
current population and also the population of the predators.
And I can do the same thing for the
rate of change of the predators. I can therefore
work out the dynamics of a system, how it's
cycling, whether it's likely to collapse, et cetera. And
these, and I can work out these equations, equations
uh can often be for uh solved in a
sort of closed form case, which just means I
can get exact conditions for what will happen at
any time in the future. Or I can get
exact conditions when such a result will or won't
happen. So like when will one ST behavioral strategy
outcompete another strategy? Um AND they're really powerful, but
sometimes they're limiting because they tend to treat um
they, they'll use terms mathematical variables to represent, let's
say entire classes of individuals or entire species or
subspecies or types or strategies or whatever. So um
they force you to assume a certain amount of
homogeneity or sameness in a population. Um One way
to get around this is to build agent based
models. Now, these are computational models. They're like little
computer simulations where instead of having one term for
a whole, every member of a population just saying
like how many of them are there? Um OR
what's their average resources, et cetera, you can stimulate
every single individual in a population independently and you
can put them in a spatial a spatial layout
where they can move around. You could put them
in a network where they can interact with their
network neighbors, you could put them in a geographical
space, you could upload a map and have them
literally move around a map and response to that.
You could have them have vision where they can
see each other and run away. Um There's a
lot of potential for this and um the downside
relative to mathematical models is that you lose a
certain amount of simple tractability with the math model.
If you can solve it correctly, all you have
to do is plug in new numbers for your
variables. And you've got a solution right away with
the agent based models. You, you literally have to
simulate the whole thing for every, every time, for
every new value you're testing and often you have
to do it many times because there's often a
lot of stochastic or randomness involved. So the same
sort of parameters might lead you to different outcomes
just based on like exactly where the agents started
or where they are in relationship to each other
or what properties they have. Um But I would
say they're not, they're not competing approaches, they're very
much complementary approaches. Um WHERE it's nice you get
as far as you can with math because it's,
it's nice to prove things. Um And there's, it's
also just, there's a certain elegance for those of
us who like math. Um But it's also you
can, you can do a lot of exploration with
agent based models. So they're pretty, pretty cool. They
often also can generate pretty neat visualizations. So they're
fun to watch. So like scientists in all uh
walks away of use agent based models. But of
course, like if you don't or if you're not
familiar with their use in science. I'm sure you're
familiar with their use in, let's say video games
or movies, right? Like any time you see like
a flock of birds or a school of fish
or you know, a stampeding herd in a, in
a video game or a movie. Um The dynamics
of those individuals are probably an come from an
aging based model that then this have pictures drawn
on top or, or imposed on top. So like
um like the Lord of the Rings, those giant
battle scenes with like 10,000 orcs and stuff like
those long shots, they're not, they didn't have 10,000
extras in costumes and they also didn't have computer
programmers program every single individual for what they did.
They built an agent based model and they coded
in some rules for behavior and they let it
go.
So in modeling, I hear people talk a lot
about fine grained and coarse grained models. What are
the main differences there? And is it that one
is better than the other or does it depend
on the context or the specific case we're studying?
OK. Yeah. So I would say this is a,
the distinction between fine grain and, and coarse grains
and modeling is, is very much sort of a
continuum rather than a stark difference. And sort of
you could think of it as like the coarseness
or fineness of, of the model. And, and this
just has to do with the kind of precision
of the representation. So for example, um in a
lot of the, the physical sciences, we can have
really, it's very easy to have very fine green
models. Uh If you're modeling, you know, a pendulum
or you're modeling, uh I don't know the, the
structural integrity of a, of a bridge or you're
modeling. Um The uh let's say that the rate
of neural spike trains, these can be really precise,
they're fine grain in the sense that the mapping
between the real world, the phenomenon that you're measuring.
And uh the model itself is al almost perfectly
1 to 1. And you know, I I like
to say like in a lot of physics models,
one of the things that's noteworthy is like the
terms in the models, all have units, they are
all quantities that are, that are the measurements. So
you are measuring charge, you're measuring voltage, you're measuring
mass. Um And so your model is about the
predicted relationships between these measured quantities. Um That's a
fine grained model. And we can sometimes do that
in the social sciences for um for situations where
we have a strong enough theory about the kinds
of things that are likely to happen and b
good enough data so that we can plug in
enough um constraints for the system. So in systems
like urban dynamics, traffic models or um evacuation models,
so people will put in like a map of
a of a, of a street grid or a
building and they'll put in car agents or human
agents trying to navigate the streets or get out
of the building so that they're, they're really trying
to see, you know, how people are moving and,
and what different assumptions about the layouts of the,
this exact street or building, how they change things.
What can allow people to escape the building more
easily? What allows traffic flow to, to happen more
easily? Um Certain epidemic models are like this. If
um you have really good information about how a
disease works, you know how contagious it is, you
know how uh what the time course is between
when you get infected and when you're contagious and
how likely you are to recover at a given
time or, or what the death rate is, you
know, where people are in physical space and how
often they tend to interact with each other depending
on where they are. You have to know a
lot to have a really fine grained model. Um
And often in the social sciences, we don't have
that level of fine grain information both in terms
of data and in terms of theory. Um BUT
that doesn't mean models aren't useful. We can have
more coarse grain models where instead of saying we
want to know exactly what is going to happen
in this exact system, we can pull back and
say become a little more abstract and say, what
kinds of things will tend to happen when systems
are kind of like this? And that's actually extremely
useful. And and I would say most modeling in
the social sciences of this latter type.
So before we get into some of the specific
examples of social dynamics that you explore in your
book, let me just ask you one more general
question. So are there any general assumptions about human
psychology that we should keep in mind when studying
social phenomena? And if so where would they come
from? I mean, because there are many different branches
of psychology, would it be, I don't know, social
psychology, developmental, psychology, evolutionary psychology. Uh How does this
work exactly?
I like this question. Um I, so, you know,
my background like in academia is, is kind of
varied and I, I started out as an undergrad
in physics and then I went and studied psychology
and my graduate degrees are on psychology. And then
uh I did um three postdocs all in the
social sciences working with economists and political scientists and,
and anthropologists. And um and I think that this
is the reason III I bring this up is
because um I, I think that a lot of
caution should be exercised in um taking theories of
psychology at face value. Um Because what I found
is is a lot of psychological theories, especially ones
that, that haven't engaged with the uh the social
sciences or sciences that involve populations often tend to
focus on kind of phenomenology, the inner life of
an individual, what it feels like what it, what
would make one happy or satisfied or, or uh
unhappy and these things are important and they're valuable
and they're important to think about. Um But in
the social world, ultimately, what psychology is for is
to produce adaptive behavior and to inhibit non adaptive
behavior. And uh you know, not every single behavior
is obviously adaptive, right? Because we, we all make
mistakes. The world is complicated. There's a ton of
uncertainty, we make a million, uh we we there
million behavioral choices every day, day to day. Um
But in overall, I think the features of psychology
that um are involved in behavior, which is all
features of psychology are involved in behavior, um are
for something, right? They, they have an instrumental purpose.
And so to me, the, I think about psychology
a lot, I mean, I'm in the cognitive science
department. We, we think about psychology quite a bit,
but I think ultimately I'm interested in, in adaptive
behavior and in and in non adaptive behavior. I'm
interested in, in social phenomenon. And so I guess,
I think of psychology in terms of the kinds
of behavioral strategies that um psychology will produce. And
I guess maybe I'm, I'm like a little bit
of a behaviorist in this uh sense, although I'm
not uh like a radical behaviorist denying uh that
we can study cognitive processes. But I think ultimately
what matters is the behavior and s and study
of cognition and psychology is ultimately in service of
understanding behavior,
right? So what is a contagion? I mean, o
of course, uh I'm not asking you here to
tell us about contagion in the sort of public
health sense, but when studying social dynamics specifically, what
does contagion mean?
Yeah. Um So in the book, um after a
couple chapters of sort of philosophy of modeling and
introduction to modeling and, and um playing around with
tools and learning some software techniques and, and making
some, some agents move around. Uh I have a
number of chapters, each of which goes through kind
of AAA modeling topic or, or tradition to study
a sort of broad topic. And, and yeah, one
of these topics is uh contagion models. Um So
you said you're not talking about disease dynamics and,
and epidemiology, but um contagion models really come from
that and, and uh they come out of a,
of an analogy that's been drawn between the way
that a disease is transmitted from one person to
another by physical contact and the way information is
transmitted from one person to another through either direct
contact, face to face or some other kind of
communication. Like now we have phones and internets and
et cetera. Um But in general, it's the idea
that you have something and the fact that you
have something means you can give that thing to
someone else without you losing the thing. And that's,
that's contagion, right? Um And so, um behavioral scientists
and social scientists since the 19 sixties have been
using contagion models to think about how innovations and
products and behaviors and norms uh diffused through populations.
And we find, you know, for a lot of
these behaviors and norms, products, et cetera, the trajectories
um in a population look very much like the
trajectory of a disease dynamic, especially diseases that are
transmitted through direct contact. And so we can think
about it in this way and therefore build models
that involve things like um how transmissible is a
a contagion. How likely if you meet someone who's
got someone who's adopted a product or behavior or
a disease, how likely are they to transmit the
thing to you? What's the contact rates or how
often are people interacting with the same people or
different people? Um Is there a kind of recovery
or dis adoption if you adopt the thing? Like
is that just it, do you just have it
forever? Do you give it up? Do you get,
you know, just like if you get better from
a sickness, um if you get better, can you
get it again? And so depending on different, there
are different dynamics depending on your answers to these
questions. But we can look at things like OK,
well, what about like the structure of a population,
how clustered a network is how um how much
do people interact? Are there, you know, uh certain
social structures like identity or a version to adopting
something associated with an out group that might affect
the contagion dynamics. Um There are certain contagions that
maybe uh don't work just like diseases. Um In
sociology, this is sometimes called complex contagion. And in
cultural evolution is just called frequency dependence, uh social
learning. But the idea is the same, which is
that um I'm more likely to adopt something if
it's uh if it's exhibited by multiple people. So
for disease, there's no difference between interacting with one
sick person, 10 times and 10 sick people one
time each, right? That's for disease transmission. That would
be the same. But in social contagion, that's not
the same, right? Because you can, you have one
friend who's doing something crazy and they're just like,
I've got this new con like I, I've been
smoking banana peels and it makes me feel awesome.
You gotta try it and you could be like,
that's great. I'm really happy for you. But like
you go, you do you but I'm not gonna
do that and they could visit you every day
with their pipe full of dried banana peels, smoking
it and then it's never going to convince you.
But if, if every single friend you see in
a week is also smoking banana peels. Now you're
thinking, oh, maybe there's something to this. I mean,
maybe you're thinking, I need new friends, but maybe
you're thinking, you know, oh maybe there's a reason
why all these people I know have done this.
Maybe I should try it so we can put
these kinds of assumptions into models. And it turns
out that the dynamics end up being a little
different. Like for example, um simple contagions that just
require an individual to, to, to spread them, 11
contact, um they just spread the more connected a
network is. And uh if you make lots of,
if you have connections between different parts of a
network, like there's a big mix, you're likely to
interact with lots of different people all the time.
That's a great way to spread contagions like this
really fast, really quickly. But if it's a complex
contagion or you need this sort of extra influence,
there's frequency dependence, consensus bias, sometimes it's called um
then it's not, that's not gonna be the same,
right? Then actually more tight knit clustered networks where
groups of people that all know each other are,
are around, right? That's going to be much more
effective than a network where lots of people know
lots of other people, but your friends don't necessarily
happen to be friends with each other. That's a
great situation for spreading a simple contagion but not
a complex contagion. So we can build models. Um
Like this, the last thing I'll mention is that
I, you know, I talked about disease models. And
I talked about behavioral models and as if they're
separate things, but actually a big trend in public
health recently in the last couple of decades has
been combining these things because of course, um the
transmission of diseases is influenced by actual social behavior
and beliefs. Right? So if you, for example, believe
that it's really important to get vaccinated or it's
really important to wear a mask or it's really
important to stay inside. Um WHEN you know, someone's
sick, that's going to affect uh whether or not
how, how a disease spreads. But of course, those
beliefs can also be transmitted socially from person to
person. And so we see in exploring these ideas,
we've, we've seen the rise of what's sometimes called
coupled contagion models. So there's two contagions, there's the
disease contagion and a behavioral contagion and looking at
how these things interact
when it comes to innovation specifically, do we have
a good understanding of what are perhaps the factors
or the circumstances that facilitate the spread or the
diffusion of innovations?
That's a good question. And it really depends on
the kinds of innovations and um how easy they
are to be adopted by an individual. So, for
example, you know, an innovation that's, you don't need
any extra things to get to, to get the
benefit from those things spread really easily. Um There
are certain things that might involve like it doesn't
benefit me unless lots of people also have the
innovation. So like a classic in the olden days,
right, when like fax machines were new, like the
first people who had fax machines, which is like,
you could send like an image of a, on
a piece of paper through the telephone. Like in
the 19 seventies, it took a while for that
to spread because having a fax machine does you
no good unless you know, people with fax machines.
And so it, it takes a kind of critical
mass um for these kinds of things to spread.
Um And you know, it, it also depends on
like how, how easily can certain individuals implement an
innovation? Uh THAT'S going to affect how much it
spreads. How hard is it to replicate an innovation?
Like there are certain things where like, oh, great,
I can believe that too or I can just
go to the store and buy that too. But
there are other things that might be more difficult
to implement. Um And so those things will be
harder to spread. They will tend to require more
constant reinforcement and, and, and clustered networks where lots
of people are talking to each other so they
can build up a community. Um
So, uh let me ask you now about opinions.
So, uh in the book, you talk about how
uh people basically form opinions and how they might
change over time. But uh before we get into
how we can study how opinions change over time.
What is an opinion?
I mean, that's the million dollar question. Um So
there's this whole class of modeling that uh I
think was originally developed by physicists. Uh WELL, it
was developed independently by physicists, sociologists and social ecologists
kind of over a long period. But I think
most, most enthusiastically taken up in terms of modeling
by physicists for a while. Um WHICH is this
domain of modeling called opinion dynamics, sometimes called belief
dynamics. And a lot of these, I love these
models because they're really fun to play with. They
can give you some broad insights into the ways
that population structure interacts with individual Proclivities. Um But
it's, I think they're really hard to apply to
make any concrete predictions with. And one of the
reasons is that um it's very hard to model
an opinion. So what is an opinion? And there's
a lot of debate over the answer to that
question. Um One thing that people still argue about
is even whether or not people really have beliefs
or opinions, you might say, well, obviously I have
beliefs, but I might say, OK, um you know,
what's your belief about um the color of triceratops?
And I don't know, but I might even say
something more obvious like what's your belief about um
or opinion about um how delicious a cupcake is?
Well, it could be the same cupcake and on
some days you might be really excited about a
cupcake and say, I think my opinion is that
this cupcake is delicious and some days maybe you've
had a lot of sugar recently, you're not feeling
well. You don't think that's delicious at all. Um
Our opinions are, are probably constantly reconstructed in the
moment about, you know, context and salient, et cetera.
So these things make opinions harder to pin down.
Um FOR the sake of modeling opinions are usually
modeled in a, in a very simplistic way. But
one that still gives us a lot of insight
in the way that the ways that in which
people interact might influence them more generally. And I,
and I think that there's actually a lot of
this is a fairly new research area, even though
it's been around for a couple decades. I think
there's a lot of low hanging fruit in bringing
in psychologists and social science scientists to some of
the work in opinion dynamics. It's been developed so
much by physicists and computer scientists in trying to
bring in more psychologically realistic and sociologically realistic models
of opinion formation and opinion dynamics. So opinion dynamics
models usually say, all right, well, let's imagine individual
has an opinion and that opinion is represented by
a number that's between, let's say negative one and
positive one and you could with any fraction in
between. So negative one means you're super against the
thing and positive one means you're super for the
thing and uh zero means you're totally ambivalent you
don't care. And we can look then at how
people, the way people, you know, express their opinion
and interact with others who have different opinions, might
lead them to change their opinions based on social
influence. Maybe you become positively influenced, you become more
similar to someone you interact with. Maybe you become
negatively influence. If someone's like, really different from you
or you hate them or they're from another, an
opposing identity group or social group, you might actually
say, well, I don't want anything to do with
them. So anything they believe I'm gonna move farther
away from them to better distinguish myself, you could
have multiple opinions that they could interact in multiple
ways. Um But again, you know, if you need
several things to build a real model of these
kinds of things, one, you need a model of
how individuals represent their own opinions in their own
minds. Then you need a model of how they
express those opinions and whether or not they're accurate
in how they express their opinions. Then you need
a model of how those expressions of opinions influence
other people and how, um by hearing someone else's
opinions, you might change your opinion or not and
you need all these things and then you need
a model for the ways in which people interact
and have interactions. Do you interact with everyone? Do
you interact preferentially with people who are already similar
to you? Um And so there's been a lot
of work already exploring variations, different answers to these
kinds of questions. Uh And so it's an ongoing
field and it's chapter five in the book goes
through a lot of these models.
OK. But let me just ask you then one
more specific question about opinions and how they change.
So when it comes to the role of social
influence, does uh sort of frequency dependent uh V
bias play a role here. I mean, if uh
we have a particular kind of opinion and suddenly
many people around us uh are expressing a different
opinion, an opposite opinion, for example, are we more
prone than to adopt that opinion or not?
Yeah. So, I mean, clearly this is an empirical
question and I think it depends um on a
lot of, on a lot of circumstances, right? Do
we have an incentive to coordinate or agree with
those people who are expressing a different opinion? Um
There's also evidence that people will express opinions to
go along with the group but not actually change
their internal beliefs nearly as much. You, you say
things that aren't totally in line with what you
really believe because it's just useful to uh express
agreement. Um This is some, yeah, I mean, there's
a difference, sometimes people call these like internal beliefs
versus external beliefs or um variations on that. Um
I think there is a lot of evidence from
psychology that people do do this in terms of,
you know, there's like the famous Solomon Ash conformity
experiments. But uh people have replicated these kinds of
phenomena in a number of circumstances. It is likely
that people, yeah, do do this where they express
a belief to go along with the majority. It's
a little bit less clear and more ambiguous to
the extent to which they really change their belief
versus um just change how they express their beliefs.
Um One of the things that we can do
with models is think about is think about these
alternative hypotheses and say, well, ok, what are the
possibilities for how people are expressing their beliefs or
changing their beliefs? And then what would it look
like? What would the dynamics or what would the
population look like in a world where people did
these different things? And then use that to compare,
compare it to the real data that we have
and say, well, ok, well, if we assume that
everyone just goes along with everyone else, it would
look like this. If we assume that everyone is
really stubborn and doesn't change their belief, it would
look like this if we assume that people care
about what the majority think, but only if they're,
let's say in an identity group, it would look
like this and that will help us pin down
not only you know, what's true or, or what's
more likely to be true or less likely to
be true. But another aspect of theory that I
think is underappreciated is the importance of what the
sociologists call scope, which is, it's, it's not enough
to just say, uh I have a theory that,
um you know, here's a great example, like all
this stuff, all this stuff on heuristics and biases
that like Conman and Tversky uh put out like
availability bias or uh confirmation bias. You know, they
have lots of biases and some of them are
mutually exclusive or would lead to different predictions. And
this is a problem and it's not an, it
doesn't mean these biases aren't real. But what it
means is that the theory is under specified. It's
not enough to say these biases exist. You have
to also say when will one bias be prevalent
and when should we expect one bias to be
really important? And when should we expect another bias
to be important? And that's scope, it's sort of
the conditions under which a theory is expected to
hold and when it's expected not to hold. So
doing these models can also help us with, with
uh the development of scope for our theories.
Mhm. And how do we go from opinion dynamics
to understanding phenomena like consensus and polarization, for example.
Yeah. So we can define consensus as a situation
where people tend to share opinions and we can
define polarization as a situation in which people tend
to have very different opinions and there may be
separated into different groups where there are clusters of
people who believe one thing and clusters of people
who believe something that's sort of diametrically opposed. And
the more opposed they are, we could say that
the more polarized they are. Um And another, there
are actually turns out there are lots of ways
people have measured polarization. And this is also a
challenge. Um So um one thing that might be
the case is like if everyone in one group
believes one set of things and then everyone in
another group believes another set of things. That's a
very polarized uh situation. What if you have a
situation where lots, there are lots of things to
believe and some people believe some constellation of things
and other people believe other constellations of things, but
it's less clear that everyone is in one big
group. And actually there are sort of many little
clusters, some people, each of which has some things,
but not other things in common with other groups.
That's a situation where there's still a lot of
sort of individual opinion polarization, but the whole population
is much less polarized because there's less sort of
clustering of beliefs into one sort of block that
is true for everyone in a group. So that
would be a way of characterizing a, a less
polarized uh system. And so these models are often
used to, to think about how um individual, individual
opinions, individual psychology or rules for communicating and updating
one's opinions. And population structure will tend to lead
toward either consensus or polarization. Um So one finding
that's been in a lot of models, if you
assume that people have lots of opinions and they
tend to interact positively with people who are more
similar than different to becoming a little bit more
similar. But if you're more different than similar, you
tend to kind of not like that person and,
and move your opinions. But away from that person,
if you have a population structure, that is fairly
clustered into discrete communities that only interact a little
bit with each other, what you end up getting
is fairly hetero or sort of fairly homogeneous communities
where everyone kind of ends up agreeing within a
community, but they differ a little bit from their
neighboring communities. And that's, that's OK. But then what
if you start adding long range connections so that
each community is then has occasional connections with communities
that are really different from them. What can happen
in, in some of these models is that communication
with individuals with very different opinions, pushes your own
opinion further away and it ends up polarizing the
population really extremely. Um I remember reading this was
uh II I do AAA slight variation on this
model in the book. Um The original model is
by two Sociologists, Andreas Flocka and Michael Macy. And
I remember in this paper published in 2011 and
I remember reading it at the time and just
being like, oh, this is uh basically an argument
uh about uh like the internet, polarizing people making
opinions more extreme and polarizing. No, I mean, it's
a simplification that doesn't capture lots of things about
the real world. But that's the whole point of
models is to say, OK, if this is the
only thing that mattered, this is what would happen
if that's not what happens, then what we put
in the model can't be the only things that
matter. So what else matters?
Changing topics. Now, I would like to ask you
a bit about uh how we study Cooper operation.
So how do we model it? And are there
specific theoretical assumptions that people bring to the table
when studying Cooper operation?
I think, you know that the answer is yes.
So that second question. Um Yeah, I, so the
Cooper Operation chapter six in the book um I
love Cooper Operation models and the topic of cooper
operation more generally, it was one of my, it's,
it's a real strong interest of mine, passion of
mine. Um I did a lot of my early
research was on co-operation models and I still work
on them sometimes. So Cooper operation can mean a
lot of things. Uh It really just means working
together, right? Um And there are lots of ways
that can happen and there are ways to work
together, for example, that are mutually beneficial that um
don't require any sort of costly behavior on the
part of anyone else. It's just, I'm gonna do
this thing. You're gonna do that thing. Hey, if
we do it together it's better for everyone. We
have no incentives to. Not awesome. Um You can
model situations like that. Uh The most common way
to model it is, uh I think it's sort
of the most interesting to theorists because it's, it's,
this, this challenge is a modeling altruism which is
Altruistic Cooper Operation, which is costly cooperations. The idea
that helping others uh is costly, you take time,
you give them resources, you um give up your
own opportunities in a lot of animal species. You
know, you give up your opportunities for reproduction or
maybe you put yourself at risk for predation to
help others. So, um you know, older sisters in,
in a lot of species like certain birds will,
they're, they're biologically, they're mature, they're ready to breathe
and have their own eggs, but they'll stay for
a couple of seasons and help their mother raise
their younger sisters or, you know, certain social animals
like alarm, uh like meerkats or, or ground squirrels
will do these alarm calls while they, when they
see a predator, they'll get up on a high
space and, and make a big call to let
everyone know that there's a predator, but of course,
that puts them at risk. So these things are
a challenge for explaining uh in an evolutionary framework,
right? Because yeah, it's clearly good to cooper, everyone
benefits from having cooperators around. And when you cooper
with each other, we both benefit and we both
do better than if we didn't help each other.
So clearly cooperations good. However, the dilemma is that
if you cooperated with me and I don't cooperated
with you, I do better than you. So and
I actually do better than if I did cooperated
with you back. So I can exploit, it's bit
easier to exploit. I, I I'm better off exploiting
you than cooperating with you. But of course, you
know that too. And so you don't want to
be exploited, so you don't cooper either and then
we're stuck. So the most common way to model
this is using a prisoner's dilemma game, which is
a very famous two player to move game where
individuals can either cooper or defect. Um IN the
format of the game that most biologists use that
I use in the book. Um We can have
just two variables here. There's the, the benefit that
you give to another person by cooperating with them.
And then it's the cost that you incur on
yourself um by cooperating. And so if we both
cooper, we each get the benefit from the other
person's aid minus the cost that we give. And
we assume that the benefit is more than the
cost. Um IF the benefit is not more than
the cost and no one will ever cooper. But
if the benefit is less than the cost. Sorry,
if the benefit is less than the cost, no
one will ever cooper. The benefit is more than
the cost, then we will, it's worth it and
it's better than just getting nothing by not doing
anything. But of course, if I pay the cost
in order to get the benefit that sucks. So
um turns out there's a number of mechanisms that
people have identified uh that enable cooper operation to
take off to um succeed and even invade sort
of uh increase, even if it's rare in a
population. And the most basic is just uh assortment.
So, if the benefits of co-operation are preferentially directed
toward other cooperating individuals, that means that those benefits
are going toward individuals who are more likely who
are also going to give other people cooper operation,
the aid of cooper operation and so co-operative uh
strategies, individuals using cooper strategies will always do better
than individuals, not using co-operative strategies. And there are
a lot of mechanisms um that enable this kind
of assortment. Um So the, the most common we
discuss one in biology is inclusive fitness or kin
selection, which is this idea of giving a preferentially
to close kin because they will share your genes.
So cooper individuals will tend to be related to
other co-operative individuals. Um BUT you don't need genes
at all. Actually, all you need is some mechanism
that keeps individuals interacting with others who are like
them So uh population structure, a sort of rigid
population structure where individuals tend to interact with the
same people over and over again will produce this
because just by chance you'll end up with clusters
of cooperators and they're just going to do better
than everyone else. Um Other mechanisms. So we model,
we can model this uh using mathematics by having
uh parameters for the probability of assorting with similar
types versus random types. We can do this with
agent based models by having, let's say a rigid
network structure or putting agents in a space and
having them interact just with local agents. And that
works too. Uh And I do both those examples
in the book. And we can also have strategies
like repeated interactions. So what happens if we're not
related to each other if we're not always interacting
with the same people for our whole lives? But
when we do interact with someone, there's the potential
for that interaction to go on for a long
time to have many, many interactions. And this has
been well known since the 19 seventies that repeated
interactions provides the opportunity for reciprocity for if you
help me, I'll help you. And if you don't
help me, I won't help you. And reciprocal reciprocating
strategies that are able to provide co-operation to other,
you know, two individuals who cooperated with them but
not reward defection with cooperations. So stop cooperating with
people who don't co-operate with them. This does really
well because co-operative individuals get the benefit of co-operation.
So again, the benefits of cooper operation are directed
toward cooper individuals. And it's also a form of
assortment in this way, it's just assortment in terms
of benefit provision rather than um let's say uh
physical proximity. Um And I focus in the, in
the book on these two examples and use both
spatial agent based models and also mathematical models um
from evolutionary game theory to derive general principles for
this. But there are lots of others. Um I
talk more a bit about, you know, people have
identified things like the ability to use reputation. Like
I actually don't need to interact with you specifically
many times to know if you're a cooperator. If
I trust my friend who's interacted with you and
says you're a cooperator. So I'll cooperated with you
because my friend vouches for you or, you know,
if we have other kinds of, of spatial structure
where we're both members of a, of a group,
then we have collective uh we have shared interests
um in larger groups, things like reciprocity don't work
so well. So there's a related game called the
Public Goods Game, which is, is, is designed to
model cooper operation in larger groups. And the idea
there is, it's very similar, you can give aid
to the group or not. Anything that you give
to the group gets sort of multiplied and divided
among everyone, whether or not they cooperated. And so
it's, it's providing a public good. But of course,
the best thing to do there is to let
everyone else provide the benefit and you free ride
off their, their work, you get all the benefit
you pay. No, the cost. Reciprocity doesn't really work
because what happens if you're in a group of
10 and one person shirks, do you stop contributing
to the group? Just because one person stopped contributing,
that hurts everyone, including those who, who also contributed.
And so this kind of reciprocity fails and you
need other mechanisms like ostracism, like kicking people out
of groups that don't co-operate um or institutional mechanisms
like punishment where you literally pay an extra cost
to uh in incur a punishment upon people who
don't co-operate. And there are lots of models showing
how this, there are lots of conditions under which
this will work. Um And so it goes on,
there's, there's a very well developed, you know, decades
old theoretical literature on different types of co-operation and
different conditions uh for it to emerge uh or
evolve.
So another very interesting thing that you also talk
about in your book is uh norms. So what
are norms and how do you model how they
emerge
again? A good question also. Yeah, chapter seven in
the book uh on norms. Uh SO, I mean,
you know, I think to some extent, we all
know what norms are, they're the, the things that
are normative in a, in a collective. They are
the things that most people do that we expect
most people to do how we expect people to
behave in certain situations. Now, there, there are some
norms that are just kind of um they're normative
because they uh let's say, have benefits for individuals
and we want everyone to do something because it,
it, it would hurt, let's say a group to
not do those things like, like a norm of
brushing your teeth. Like that's normative. You should brush
your teeth, you're gonna get um sort of shamed
a bit if you just refuse to brush your
teeth every day. Um There are other kinds of
norms that involve interactions and uh those are the
kinds of norms that I'm focusing more on in
the chapter. And these norms involve the ability to
do basically the same thing or do things in
the same way as other people. Now doing things
in the same way, could mean doing the same
thing or it could mean doing the complimentary thing.
And we explore both ideas in the, in the
chapter. Um And this allows us to model norms
as solutions to a coordinating game. So a coordinating
game is another kind of game um that you
can study using game theory. Uh And that's, that's
how it's done in the book. Uh WHERE I
want to do the same thing as a simple
coordinating game is just like each of us are
trying to do the same thing. Um You can
imagine like if we're greeting each other, we could
give each other a handshake or we could high
five. Now, if I go to shake your hand
and you go to give me a high five,
that's a Miscoordination. If we do the same thing,
it doesn't really matter if we high five our
handshake. As long as we're doing the same thing.
In this example, the cost to mis coordinating is
pretty low. But you can imagine cases in which
it's not so low. Like for example, if you
drive on the right side of the road and
I drive on the left side of the road
and we're driving toward each other, that would be
a really catastrophic Miscoordination. Um And you know, coordinations,
Miscoordination can be enforced through all kinds of mechanisms
like punishment. Like if you just don't do things
the way other people do them, there are communities
where failure to conform to the norm can result
in, in, in pretty strong punishment um including things
like imprisonment or, or beatings or even death. So
we model, you can model a simple co ordination
game to think about. Well, how, how do people
converge on doing the same thing? Well, if you
interact with a bunch of people in a population,
the thing to do, if, if it doesn't matter
which norm, you're gonna, you're gonna have as long
as you do the same thing, then the best
strategy is always just do the popular thing, do
the common thing. And we can show really easily
like that in a population where all that matters
is doing the same thing as everyone else. Any
behavior that is more popular than others will just
always go to fixation, everyone will end up doing
that. But that, that implies that uh norms are
really hard to change and then norms will always,
you know, go to fixation and norms, whatever norm
is, is popular will always dominate. Um What if
a norm? What if norms are some norms are
better than others, right? Like there's two all norms
if their coordinations are equilibria because everyone is doing
the same thing and deviations from the norm can
be punished. But what if there are two possibilities
to equilibria or more equilibria? And one is better
than others? So, you know, what if one population
has a, you know, a norm where um everyone
uh who anyone who steals is immediately put to
death. And another group where people who steals are
steal are, you know, first chastised and talked to
and then have a, a slowly increasing slope of
punishment. Tom that second group is probably gonna do
a bit better under some circumstances than the first
group. Uh I'm a big, I like unions, not
everyone does, but I think unions are good in
general. Uh YOU know, not, not universally good in
every single domain, but I think overall they provide
a real benefit. You can imagine, like if you're
in a population that doesn't have a union in,
in, in, in, in whatever your job is and
you start organizing or for, to try to get
everyone to be in a union that's gonna come
at a cost that's not gonna go well for
you maybe. But if you can convince everyone and
you are in a union, that union group might
do better, like you have better benefits and job
security and et cetera. Um And so in models
like this, you, you, it's not always better to
do the more popular thing because even a something
that is not in the majority can be better
overall because when you can coordinate on that norm,
you do better, but it's not, that's usually not
enough to get the invasion of or the spread
of a rare norm. Even if it's better for
everyone to do a better thing. If you're trying
to agitate to get people to join a union,
you might think everyone might agree. It would be
better if we could all join the union. But
everyone's worried about doing it because if you try
and it's just a few of you doing it,
you all get fired. That's no good. So how
do you get uh rare norms that are ultimately
group, beneficial to spread and one solution that's been
proposed that we talk about? I talk about in
the book is group structure. So having community structure
where there are multiple communities that have that different
norms um can allow uh for the spread of
norms that are beneficial to flow from the better
performing group to the other performing group through several
mechanisms. Um THROUGH direct copying where people are more
like if you people occasionally copy norms associated with
success, even if occasionally they're from um individuals in
another community, it's much easier to spread rare norms.
If people move from a high performing group to
uh from a low performing group to a high
performing group, it allows norms to spread there. There
are several mechanisms. Um And this allows us to,
to think about populations, not just as like one
big group, which is a really common way to
model populations in a lot of fields, but think
about the importance of group structure and how that
matters when groups compete or even just interact.
So we've been talking here about modeling in the
social sciences, but I guess that we can also
talk about science itself as an institution as a
social phenomenon, right? So how do you approach that
through modeling? I mean, what are perhaps or what
would you say are perhaps some of the most
interesting aspects of how social dynamics operate in science
that will allow for us to have a better
understanding of how knowledge production occurs there.
Yeah. So this is an area of research that
I've sort of, I've been involved in since about
2014. And uh it started out as this kind
of side project and, and spiraled out into uh
more major projects because, because people ended up being
interested. Um And I think it's, I think science
in general is science is a, is a social
phenomenon like a lot of others, it has norms,
it involves beliefs and it involves uh people doing
things responding to incentives and we can model how
the sort of best practices uh for learning truth
interact with social factors like norms and incentives. So,
um I also think like it's really bad to
do science uncritically. I mean, thinking about what, what
are we doing when we're doing science? What, what
is science? How does, how does knowledge progress is
a nontrivial thing? And you know, it's been said
uh there, there is no science um that doesn't
involve philosophy of science, there's just science that is
uncritical about its philosophical assumptions. Um And I think,
I think that's right. Um So there are lots
of ways to model science and, and of course,
when we model anything we have to simplify. So
uh what I like to start out with is
to say, well, let's imagine a kind of simplified
pure science of a hypothesis tester testing hypotheses using
some qua high quality but occasionally error prone methods
like all methods are and then trying to discover
whether or not uh the results of the experiment
either support or fail to support the hypothesis. So
already this is an oversimplification but you know, it's,
it's, it's a model and, and it gets us
started and so we can model things this way
like OK, I've got, um I've got a result.
I have a method. I tested it using the
result. I know that if my result is correct,
that my method will give me a positive result.
If my hypothesis is correct, my, my method will
give me positive results. Let's say 80% of the
time, it's pretty good. And if my uh method
is wrong, my, if my hypothesis is wrong, my
method will give me a positive result. Still false
positive. Let's say 5% of the time most people
are comfortable with this kind of error, 5% error.
And so let's say I get a positive result.
What, what's the likelihood that I'm actually right? Well,
I got a positive result. So I know that
if, if the thing was true, it would be
positive 80% of the time. If it was false,
it would be positive 5% of the time. Which
means I don't know, a lot of people would
say, well, 5% chance that it's a false positive.
So there's a 95% chance that it's right. And
problem is that that might be right and it
might not be because actually I haven't given you
enough information to answer the question because an important
piece of information that you don't know in the
way I framed it is what was the probability
that any hypothesis I generate was correct? What's the
probability before I did the experiment that I was?
Right. And that matters a lot because it turns
out if most hypotheses I generate are correct and
I get a positive result with a, you know,
low error rate, then I, I can have pretty
good confidence. But if most hypotheses I generate are
wrong. If I'm testing lots of things that are
wrong, then there's a good chance that when I
do get a positive result, it's going to be
a false positive just because most hypotheses are wrong.
And so you need to consider that. And so
we can model is using, there's a, a very
famous equation in probability theory called base theorem uh
which just relates conditional probabilities. And so using things
like posit the probability of positive and uh sort
of type one or type two errors and the
prior probability of being right, which is also called
the base rate of hypotheses. We can explore how
error and hypothesis selection interact to produce more or
less accurate results from that. That's the sort of
building block of the rest of the models of
science that I explore in the chapter we can
explore things like what about publication bias. So what
happens? Uh IF, if I get a result and
it's positive or negative, I might have some probability,
I might be able to say, I think it's
right with some confidence. But if I know that
my error, my methods are error prone. And I
wasn't super confident in my answer in the beginning,
getting one positive result will probably increase my confidence.
But shouldn't make me certain, getting one negative result
will decrease my confidence. But shouldn't make me certain,
I need more evidence. And we can use these
sort of Bayesian approaches sometimes called Bayesian updating to
imagine. Well, ok. Well, what if we have replication?
What if we have lots of evidence, evidence for
or against a hypothesis? Well, if that evidence is
accurate and unbiased, even if it's all noisy overall,
as long as it's more likely to be right
than wrong bay and updating will eventually let me
converge on the correct res response, the correct inference
and say I'm highly confident after a number of
trials that it's correct or it's incorrect. The problem
is what if there's publication bias, right? What if
negative results are much less likely to be published
or communicated than positive results? And so confirmatory results
are more like confirmatory evidence is more likely to
get factored into my ba updating than disc confirmatory
evidence. And we can show that this has a
terrible effect, right? With uh when you have publication
bias, you can end up to having very, very
high confidence that some result is correct even when
it's not correct because your source of information is
is messed up. Um Finally, we can also look
at, you know, individual scientists and models in which
individuals vary in the quality of their methods. And
what happens when they look uh they're responding to
different kinds of incentives, like let's say incentives to
publish. So maybe every everyone is no one's being
strategic in, in some of these models, we can
say, well, let's say everyone is doing the best.
They can, they just have different methods, some methods
are better than others. But the lazy methods make
it easier to publish positive results than the more
rigorous methods which take longer or um are more
likely to correctly identify wrong results that don't get
you the prestigious publications. Well, if individuals who publish
lots of positive results are the ones that get
good jobs that get big grants that attract graduate
students. And therefore they're the ones who passed on
their methods. We get what, what Richard mcelreath and
I called the natural selection of bad science, which
is sort of this evolutionary dynamic in which the
quality of methods can degrade. Now, that doesn't have
to happen. Right. Again, the model, the conclusions of
the model only follow if the assumptions of the
model hold and there are cases in which those
assumptions don't hold. If, if it's not so easy
to publish low quality results. If peer review is
high quality, if there are other selection forces um
that, that maintain uh more rigorous results. If uh
the number of publications is less important than, you
know, the rigor of your work, then those dynamics
won't hold. Um But we can use models to
try to explore the nature of the science that
we are doing and, and the trustworthiness of the
science that we're doing. So that's, that's chapter eight.
Uh By the way, do you think that by
modeling science as a social phenomenon and learning more
about the social dynamics behind science as an institution
that perhaps we could, we could potentially use some
of these knowledge to uh try to reduce or
ideally eliminate some of the bad incentives that scientists
are exposed to?
I really hope so. Yeah, I mean, that's one
of the reasons I do it. Um YOU know,
to, to begin with the that early work, some
of that early work was, was really just to
call attention to the fact that, you know, this
kind of selection pressure for publication exists in a
lot of fields and if it goes unchecked, it
will lead to really bad outcomes. And, and I
think that that paper in particular, um it ends
up being my most cited paper. So obviously, it
had some influence. But um you know, I I
think it called attention to uh to this phenomenon
and, and it did encourage people along with lots
of other work by lots of people. I encourage
people to, to try to um downgrade these kinds
of incentives. Um I think these kinds of models
also can allow us to consider different kinds of
interventions, like what would happen if there were different
kinds of incentive structures. Um uh I with the
uh with Klin o'connor, who I know you, you
interviewed previously, we uh did a model of science
um that kind of integrated ideas about norms spreading
between communities and looked at how, you know, perhaps
interdisciplinary could get around some of the problems where
norms get entrenched in communities. And uh it becomes
harder for new and better methods to spread when
people have a bias toward doing things the way
they always did things? Um But if you promote
um the importance of getting ideas from other communities
or um getting the approval of individuals in other
communities, then this can allow um more high quality
methods to spread. And then we talk about that
in a, in a paper of mine that that's
not covered in the book but that there is
uh some things we can use these kinds of
models to do.
Mhm So I have a couple more questions. These
were not more general that I would like to
ask you. So um are there or is there
a set of guidelines that uh scientists, students and
other people should follow when they want to turn
an idea, an hypothesis that they might want to
test into a model?
It's a good question. I've tried to answer that.
Um Yeah, I wrote a 2020 paper called uh
How to turn a verbal verbal theory into a
formal model which uh I, I put a version
of that in the, in the book um in
chapter 10. Um And so I've tried to come
up with some guidelines uh and, and things to
keep in mind. Um And I'll, I'll go through
a little bit of that. But I, I want
to also say like, like so many things that
are ultimately that are creative in nature and I
think model building is creative in nature. Um There's,
there's no one right way to do it, but
there is, there are lots of the wrong ways
to do it too and um wrong ways to
do it are generally involve um just lack of
care and laziness or failure to consider one's assumptions
um or lack of preparation. So, failure to do
due diligence in um finding good techniques or uh
probating literature, et cetera. Um But I think that,
you know, generally being, being familiar with models helps
you build models. Um II, I want to talk
to somebody I think was a psychologist about developing
their model to, to sort of formalize a theory
they had. And, and I was like, I think
you should try to like go to the literature
and look at similar things that have been done
and maybe try to replicate some of those models
and really understand them before you try to build
your own model. And they were kind of surprised
about this result. And I just was sort of
shocked and I'm like, it's sort of like, you
know, it, if you're an architect, you don't just
start building up your own building, right? You, you,
you have to understand how previous architecture works. If
you're a painter, like you under, you learn basic,
you know, uh techniques about color and mixing and,
and brush techniques and you learn how different classic
painters made their paintings before you go and, and
you, you paint your own things. That's how good
painting works. That's how good architecture works and it's
how good model building works. Um They, there are
lots of, you know, when I, whenever I build
new models, there's often processes where I'm just like
taking things from other models I've seen and thinking
about how to, you know how certain pieces that
I've seen before might be able to fit together
to solve the problem that I'm working with now.
And ultimately, we wanna try to articulate our problem
or our idea as simply and clearly as possible.
There have been other cases in which I mean,
I can think of at least one instance where,
you know, we, we thought of all the things
involved in some scenario that would be maybe important
to some dynamic, some process and thought, OK, we'll
put this in the model and this in the
model and this in the model and this in
the model and you know, I can code a
model like that, I can run simulations with it,
but it comes in very difficult to analyze when
there's so many things going on. And part of
the, the value of a model is the simplification.
So what ended up having to happen was thinking
about, well, what are these, what of these factors,
which of them are essential to the idea that
I'm trying to develop and which of them are
maybe things to add later. But they, they're not
the core idea or the core, the core point
of the theory. And so if they're not, you
chuck them for now, it doesn't mean they're not
important, but it means they're not important to establish
a baseline. It's also like in any given domain,
like if I'm modeling cooper operation, there's hundreds or
thousands of co-operation models. So I'm gonna build on
all those and use what has been learned there
and maybe I can start extending and build a
fairly complicated model because I know how all the
simpler versions will work. If I'm, you know, modeling
AAA phenomenon that's not extensively modeled, that hasn't been
modeled much. I'm gonna try to start as simply
as possible because I need to establish baselines and,
and often it's frustrating because you want to go
more complicated. Um I'll tell you some advice that
um I, I took from uh there's a biologist
named John Wilkins, um who, who, who wrote a
really nice blog post along along a while ago,
maybe 1015 years ago. Um THAT I I've been
really influenced by on the relationship between modelers and
empirical scientists. And um John points out that it's
really important to not think of a modeler if
you're an empirical scientist interested in working with modelers,
like the modeler is not a technician whose job
it is to prove your idea is true with
math, right? The modeler is a theorist and a
and a scientist whose work contributes to the refinement
and further development of a theory. And it's not
gonna keep the theory as it is, it's going
to change the theory by formalizing it because you
have to realize what is in there and what's
not. And so some advice I always have is
like if you're a modeler, you know, take what
the emir the empirical researchers have done very seriously.
Um It, it drives me a little bit crazy
when people um say, well, they'll be doing a
model of, you know, a biological or social phenomenon.
And they'll say, well, I'm not really a biologist
or I'm not really a social scientist. And my
response is always like, but you're doing a model
of social science of a social phenomenon or of
a biological phenomenon. So in this time, like for
this project, you are a biologist or you are
a social scientist and therefore you need to be
judged by the standards of that group. And it's
not enough, you can't be lazy in the way
you make assumptions, you need to be thoughtful about
them. Um And you know, even like biologists and
social scientists who don't do modeling, like they know
a lot of things and talking to them will
help make sure that a model is grounded in
what's already known is consistent with the best evidence
that we have that maybe engages with some potential
theories that this will help to formalize or disambiguate
between the the the reverse of that is if
you are an empirical researcher, right, take what the
modeler is doing seriously and understand that they are
not a technician who is there to, you know,
just show that you're right, but they are a
collaborator. And that means that you have to understand
how the model works, at least enough to be
able to assess um the quality of the assumptions
that are going into it. And that's actually a
really important contribution empirical researchers make to modeling. When
I collaborate with people who spend more of their
time doing empirical work, it's extremely valuable and and
a really rewarding because they are able to bring
all of their domain knowledge to the modeling, which
helps make the model much better. So I think
actually like there's a lot of room for collaboration
between modelers and and researchers who focus more on
empirical work.
So I I guess that you've already ended up
talking about many of the considerations that we have
to take into account when it comes to my
last question here. But what would you say are
probably some of the main limitations of models that
it is important for people to keep in mind
when modeling and uh after modeling and after they
get the results, the kinds of conclusions that they
can derive from them.
Yeah. So I, I feel like as a just
in general and certainly in the book, I'm a
bit of a modeling evangelist where I, you know,
modeling is, is great and I, I love it
and I want, I want social scientists, you know,
broadly defined to use models more. But um of
course, there are caveats, right? And the world is
really complicated and any one model is going to
omit a ton of important details about the world
and that's fine and that's actually like, right and
good. That's the point of models is their omission
because by omitting things, they draw our attention to
the simplified versions that he help us see patterns
that are harder to see when we look at
the real world. But um if we rely too
much on a model uh to base our con
you know, base our assumptions on, um we end
up forgetting all the things that are not realistic,
right, or limitations to the model or things, maybe
a model didn't take into consideration. Well, the model
made the assumption, let's say that people uh interact
randomly but people don't interact randomly. So how do
the conclusions of the model change when we population
structure? Or the model assumes that the only thing
people care about is um material wealth, but people
care about other things and material wealth. So how
does the behavior that we expect change when people's
um values are different um like economics, which is
the social science um that embraced modeling earliest and
most enthusiastically had a real problem where they, you
know, you know, for a while and, and especially
like coming into the 19 seventies ish, um we're
making a lot of assumptions about the way things
are um based on models that were not continuously
checked against empirical data that were not continuously refined
to better align with empirical data. And um the
observations of people who are actually out on the
streets. And that's basically why behavioral economics as a
field, it was able to get as big as
it did and become as important as it was.
I mean, that whole field is, is just a
cottage industry of demonstrating all the cases in which
the models of economists were wrong were making like
incorrect assumptions and it was really beneficial. And I
think for, for that field to, to, to see
all these mismatches between their model and the way
people actually behave because then it forces a revision
of the models it, it forces frameworks. Uh It
follows models um to be revised. And this is,
is one of the reasons why some of us
are really interested in not just individual theories where
each model corresponds to one theory in isolation, but
developing frameworks theoretical frameworks where we have many, many
linked sets of assumptions. Um And, and the idea
of building a theoretical framework means that the more
rich our framework is the, the, the more our
model assumptions are constrained because they have to um
they have to agree not just with uh aspects
of the system that we're modeling right there. And
then, but lots of aspects of human behavior and
psychology and social organization and evolution and culture that
we know from lots and lots of work and
lots of different models and lots of empirical science.
And so all of this ends up being in
service hopefully of developing more coherent and cogent theoretical
frameworks for uh the social sciences. Um I, I
like the, the analogy of maps and territories, right?
Like the map is not the territory, but you
would rather have a map to explore the territory
and the the solution ultimately to, you know, to
get a better sense of the territory is to
have many maps that serve different functions.
Great. So let's send on that note then and
the book is again modeling social behavior, mathematical and
agent based models of social dynamics and cultural evolution
and leaving a link to it in the description
box of the interview. And doctor Min, just before
we go apart from the book, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Sure. Yeah. Uh You can uh the easiest way
to get in touch or, or find out what
I'm up to is my website which is just
malvino.com. Um I'm not really on Twitter or X
anymore. Um But I, I am occasionally on blue
sky for those who are using it. Um But
the best way is probably just to check my
website. Um So yeah,
great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a pleasure to talk with you.
It was great. Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for the Agns Ferger, Ken
Herz and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K
Hes Mark Smith Jungle, Tom Hummel Sran, David Sloan
Wilson Yasa, Dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba Ad Hunt Pavlo Stassi, Nale
Me, Gary G Alman, Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca
Lati Gilon Cortez Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophanous Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa
Anton Erickson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry
Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson Chris to Kimberley Johnson Benjamin Gilbert Jessica.
No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George
Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner
Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca
Stein. Tom Ween, Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller
Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all.